Harrison's Principles of internal
Medicine 22nd 2
venkat arjun
Page 1
The prototypic lesion of infective endocarditis (IE), the vegetation (Fig. 133-1), is
a mass of platelets, fibrin, microorganisms, and scant inflammatory cells
Infection most commonly involves heart valves but may also occur on the low-
pressure side of a ventricular septal defect, on mural endocardium damaged by
aberrant jets of blood or foreign bodies, or on intracardiac devices.
The analogous process involving arteriovenous shunts, arterio-arterial shunts
(patent ductus arteriosus), or a coarctation of the aorta is called infective
endarteritis.
Page 2
Acute IE is a hectically febrile illness that rapidly damages cardiac structures,
seeds extracardiac sites, and, if untreated, progresses to death within weeks
Subacute IE follows an indolent course; causes structural cardiac dam- age only
slowly, if at all; rarely metastasizes; and is gradually progressive unless
complicated by a major embolic event or a ruptured mycotic aneurysm.
While con- genital heart diseases remain a constant predisposition,
predisposing conditions in developed countries have shifted from chronic
rheumatic heart disease (still common in developing countries) to injection drug
use, degenerative valve disease, and intracardiac devices.
age-adjusted mortality rates in people /55 years old have declined in the United
States.
however, there has been acceleration in mortality in people aged 25–44 years,
likely associated with an increase in opioid use disorder (OUD) and injection
drug use in this age group.
In developed countries, 25–35% of cases of native-valve endocarditis (NVE) are
health care–associated,
16–30% of all cases are pros- thetic-valve infections (PVE).
The risk of PVE is greatest during the initial year after valve replacement;
greater for bioprosthetic valves than mechanical valves.
IE involving cardiovascular implantable electronic devices (CIED-IE)—greater on
implanted defibrillators and resynchronization devices than on permanent
pacemakers—occurs in 0.5–1.14 cases per 1000 recipients.
Recent large studies from developed areas identify Staphylococcus aureus as
the most common bacterial species causing IE.
The oral cavity, skin, and upper respiratory tract are the respective primary
portals for viridans streptococci, staphylococci, and HACEK organ- isms
(Haemophilus species, Aggregatibacter species, Cardiobacterium
hominis, Eikenella corrodens, and Kingella kingae)
Streptococcus gal- 1037 lolyticus subspecies gallolyticus (formerly S. bovis
biotype 1) originates from the gastrointestinal tract and is associated with
colonic polyps and tumors
Enterococci enter the bloodstream primarily from the genitourinary tract.
Health care–associated IE, most commonly caused by S. aureus, coagulase-
negative staphylococci (CoNS), and entero- cocci, may have either a
nosocomial onset (55%) or a community onset (45%).
IE complicates 8–25% of episodes of catheter-associated S. aureus bacteremia;
the higher rates are detected in high-risk patients studied by transesophageal
echocardiography (TEE) (see “Cardiac Imaging,” below).
PVE arising within 2 months of valve surgery—i.e., early PVE
is generally nosocomial and is the result of intraoperative contamination of the
prosthesis or a postoperative infection.
This nosocomial origin is reflected in the microbial causes: S. aureus, CoNS,
facultative gram-neg- ative bacilli, diphtheroids, and fungi.
The portals of entry and organisms causing PVE beginning >12 months after
surgery—i.e., late PVE
are similar to those in community-acquired NVE.
Regardless of the time of onset after surgery, the majority of CoNS strains that
cause PVE are resistant to methicillin
The microbiology of TAVR-PVE, while generally similar to that of PVE, is notable
for an increased frequency of entero- cocci.
Risk factors associated with TAVR-PVE include male sex, diabetes, renal failure,
and moderate postimplantation aortic valve regurgitation.
CIED-IE involves the device or the endothelium at points of device contact.
Occasionally, there is concurrent valvular infection.
One-third of cases of CIED-IE present within 3 months after device implantation
or manipulation,
one-third between 3 and 12 months,
and one-third
1 year.
S. aureus and CoNS cause the majority of cases.
IE in people who inject drugs (PWID), especially that involving the tricuspid
valve, is commonly caused by S. aureus, which is often resis- tant to methicillin.
Left-sided valve infections in PWID
In addition to the usual causes of IE, infection due to Enterobacterales,
Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Candida species, and spo- radically by unusual
organisms (Bacillus, Lactobacillus, Corynebacterium species) is encountered.
About 5–15% of patients with IE have negative blood cultures; in one-third to
one-half of these cases, cultures are negative because of prior antibiotic
exposure.
The remainder are infected by fastidious organisms, such as some streptococci;
nutritionally variant bacteria now designated Granulicatella, Gemella, and
Abiotrophia species;
Coxiella burnetii; and Bartonella species
Some fastidious organisms
Page 3
occur in characteristic geographic settings (e.g., C. burnetii and Barton- ella
species in Europe,
Brucella species in the Middle East)
Tropheryma whipplei causes an indolent, culture-negative form of IE.
C. burnetii has a predilection for prosthetic valves.
Corynebacterium species and Cuti- bacterium acnes may involve intracardiac
devices and be slow to grow in blood cultures.
Mycobacterium chimaera, which may be difficult to recover from blood cultures
unless special media is used, has caused a global outbreak of PVE and
disseminated infection as a result of aero- sols from contaminated heater-cooler
machines used during cardiopul- monary bypass.
atrial myxoma, marantic endocarditis, and the antiphospholipid antibody
syndrome may mimic culture-negative IE.
Endothelial injury (e.g., at the site of impact of high-velocity blood jets or on the
low-pressure side of a cardiac structural lesion) allows either direct infection by
virulent organisms or the development of a platelet–fibrin thrombus—a condition
called nonbacterial throm- botic endocarditis (NBTE).
This thrombus serves as a site of bacterial attachment during transient
bacteremia.
The cardiac conditions most commonly resulting in NBTE are mitral
regurgitation, aortic stenosis, aortic regurgitation, ventricular septal defects, and
complex congenital heart disease.
NBTE also arises as a result of a hypercoagulable state; this phenomenon gives
rise to marantic endocarditis (uninfected veg- etations seen in patients with
malignancy and chronic diseases)
and to bland vegetations complicating systemic lupus erythematosus and
antiphospholipid antibody syndrome.
Organisms that cause IE enter the bloodstream from colonized body surfaces or
sites of infection.
S. aureus adherence to intact endothelium may be mediated by local
inflammation inducing von Willebrand factor on endothelial cell surfaces with
resulting adherence of both platelets and S. aureus.
Alternatively, S. aureus adherence to injured endothelium may be mediated by
local deposition of fibrin and cir- culating von Willebrand factor on exposed
subendothelial tissue to which in turn S. aureus adhere directly
Other microorganisms in the blood adhere to NBTE.
The organisms that commonly cause IE have surface adhesin molecules,
collectively called microbial surface com- ponents recognizing adhesin matrix
molecules (MSCRAMMs) that mediate adherence to NBTE sites or injured
endothelium
Adherence is facilitated by fibronectin-binding proteins present on many gram-
positive bacteria;
by clumping factor (a fibrinogen- and fibrin-binding surface protein) on S.
aureus;
by fibrinogen-binding surface proteins (Fss2),
collagen-binding surface protein (Ace),
and Ebp pili (the latter mediating platelet adherence) on Enterococcus faecalis;
and by glucans or FimA (a member of the family of oral mucosal adhesins) on
strep- tococci.
Fibronectin-binding proteins are required for S. aureus inva- sion of intact
endothelium; thus, these surface proteins may facilitate infection of previously
normal valves
Organisms deep in vegetations are metabolically inactive (nongrowing) and
relatively resistant to killing by antimicrobial agents.
The clinical manifestations of IE—other than constitutional symp- toms, which
probably result from cytokine production—arise from damage to intracardiac
structures;
embolization of vegetation frag- ments leading to infection or infarction of
remote tissues;
hematog- enous infection of sites during bacteremia;
and tissue injury due to the deposition of circulating immune complexes or
immune responses to deposited bacterial antigens.
The highly variable clinical IE syndrome spans a continuum between acute and
subacute presentations.
The causative microorganism is primarily responsible for the temporal course of
IE.
0-Hemolytic streptococci, S. aureus, and pneumococci typically result in an
acute course,
IE caused by Staphylococcus lugdunensis (a coagulase- negative species)
or by enterococci may present acutely.
Subacute IE is typically caused by viridans streptococci, enterococci, CoNS, and
the HACEK group.
IE caused by Bartonella species, T. whipplei, C. burnetii, or M. chimaera is
exceptionally indolent.
In patients with subacute presentations, fever is typically low-grade, rarely
exceeding 39.4°C (103°F);
in contrast, temperatures of 39.4°– 40°C (103°–104°F) are often noted in acute
IE.
Although heart murmurs are usually indicative of the predisposing cardiac
pathology rather than of IE, valvular damage and ruptured chordae may result in
new regurgitant murmurs.
In acute IE involving a normal valve, murmurs may be absent initially but
ultimately are detected in 85% of cases.
Congestive heart failure (CHF) resulting from valve dysfunction or, occasion-
ally, intracardiac fistulae develop in 30–40% of patients.
Extension of leaflet infection into adjacent annular or myocardial tissue results in
paravalvular abscesses, which in turn may cause intracardiac fistulae with new
murmurs.
Aortic paravalvular infection may burrow into the upper ventricular septum and
interrupt the conduction system
lead- ing to varying degrees of heart block.
Mitral paravalvular abscesses are more distant from the conduction system and
rarely cause conduction abnormalities.
Coronary artery emboli occur in 2% of patients and may result in myocardial
infarction.
The classic nonsuppurative periph- eral manifestations of subacute IE (e.g.,
Janeway lesions; Fig. 133-2A) are related to prolonged infection; with early
diagnosis and treat- ment, these have become infrequent.
septic embolization mimicking some of these lesions (subungual hemorrhage,
Osler’s nodes) is common in patients with acute S. aureus IE
Musculoskeletal pain usually remits promptly with treatment but
Page 4
must be distinguished from focal metastatic infections (e.g., spondy- lodiscitis),
which may complicate 10–15% of cases.
Hematogenously seeded focal infection occurs most often in the skin, spleen,
kidneys, skeletal system, and meninges.
Arterial emboli, one-half of which precede the diagnosis of IE, are clinically
apparent in up to 50% of patients. S. aureus IE, mobile vegetations >10 mm in
diameter, and infection involving the mitral valve anterior leaflet are
independently associated with an increased risk of embolization.
Embolic arterial occlusion causes regional pain or ischemia-induced organ
dysfunc- tion (e.g., of the kidney, spleen, bowel, extremity).
Cerebrovascular emboli presenting as strokes or occasionally as
encephalopathy com- plicate 15–35% of cases;
however, evidence of clinically asymptomatic emboli is found on magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) in 30–65% of patients with left-sided IE
The frequency of stroke is 8 per 1000 patient-days during the week prior to
diagnosis and decreases to 4.8 and 1.7 per 1000 patient-days during the first
and second weeks of effective antimicrobial therapy, respectively.
Emboli occurring late during or after effective therapy do not in themselves
constitute evidence of failed antimicrobial treatment.
Other neurologic complications include aseptic or purulent menin- gitis,
intracranial hemorrhage due to hemorrhagic infarcts or ruptured mycotic
aneurysms, and seizures
Mycotic aneurysms are focal dila- tions of arteries occurring at points in the
artery wall that have been weakened by infection in the vasa vasorum or where
septic emboli have lodged.
Microabscesses in the brain and meninges occur commonly in S. aureus IE;
intracerebral abscesses requiring surgical drainage are infrequent.
Immune complex deposition on the glomerular basement mem- brane causes
diffuse hypocomplementemic glomerulonephritis and renal dysfunction, which
typically improve with effective antimicrobial therapy.
Embolic renal infarcts cause flank pain and hematuria but rarely renal
dysfunction.
Splenic infarcts or abscess can manifest as left upper abdominal, pleuritic chest,
or left shoulder pain.
Among PWID, 35–60% of IE is limited to the tricuspid valve and presents with
fever with faint or no murmur and without peripheral manifesta- tions.
Septic pulmonary emboli, which are common with tricuspid IE, cause cough,
pleuritic chest pain, nodular pulmonary infiltrates, and occasionally empyema or
pyopneumothorax
Infection of the aortic or mitral valve presents with the typical clinical features of
IE, including peripheral manifestations.
Health care–associated IE has typical manifestations unless associ- ated with an
intracardiac device or masked by the symptoms of concur- rent illness.
CIED-IE may be associated with obvious (especially within 6 months of device
manipulation)
or cryptic generator pocket infection or arise through bacteremic seeding
without pocket infection.
Fever, sepsis, minimal murmur, and occasionally pulmonary symptoms due to
septic emboli are seen.
In both early and late PVE, paravalvular infection is common and often results in
partial valve dehiscence, regurgitant murmurs, CHF, or disruption of the
conduction system.
The diagnosis of IE is established with certainty only when vegetations are
examined histologically and microbiologi- cally.
Now known as the Duke–International Society for Cardiovascular Infectious Dis-
eases (Duke-ISCVID) Criteria for IE,
A clinical diagnosis of definite IE requires two major criteria, one major and three
minor criteria, or five minor criteria.
IE is rejected if an alternative diagnosis is established, if there is no recurrence
despite therapy for <4 days, or if surgery or autopsy after <4 days of antimicro-
bial therapy yields no histologic evidence of IE.
Cases not classified as definite or rejected are considered possible IE when
either one major and one minor criterion or three minor criteria are fulfilled.
Absent extenuating circumstances, patients with definite and possible IE are
treated as having IE.
The Duke-ISCVID Criteria reiterate that multiple blood cultures are the gold
standard for diagnosing IE.
Collection of three cultures from separate venipuncture sites is still
recommended but is no longer required.
bacterial species considered “typical” for causing IE are defined as those whose
recovery from blood has been strongly associated with IE;
the pathogen list has been expanded to include all streptococcal species except
S. pneumoniae and S. pyogenes, S. lugdunensis, E. faecalis regardless
“streptococcus-like bacteria” (e.g., Granulicatella spp., Abiotrophia spp., and
Gemella spp.).
To fulfill a major criterion, a typical organism that causes IE (e.g., those listed
previously plus S. aureus and HACEK organisms) must be recovered in two or
more blood culture sets;
other organisms, considered “nontypical” must grow in three or more blood
culture sets and the clinical presentation must be unexplained by an
extracardiac focus of infection.
In patients with intracardiac prosthetic material, CoNS, Corynebacterium
striatum, Corynebacterium jeikeium, C. acnes, Serratia marcescens,
Pseudomonas aeruginosa, nontubercu- lous mycobacteria (e.g., M. chimaerae),
and Candida species should be considered “typical.”
In patients with suspected NVE, PVE, TAVR-PVE, or CIED-IE who have not
received antibiotics during the prior 2 weeks, three two- bottle blood culture
sets containing the appropriate volume of blood (10 mL per bottle) should be
obtained, ideally from different venipunc- ture sites.
If the cultures remain negative after 48–72 h, two or three additional blood
culture sets should be obtained, and the laboratory should be consulted for
advice regarding optimal culture techniques.
Page 5
New valvular regurgitation (new/worsening murmur is NOT sufficient; requires
echocardiographic evidence)
Vascular phenomenon: arterial emboli, septic pulmonary infarcts, mycotic
aneurysm, intracranial hemorrhage, conjunctival hemorrhage, Janeway lesions,
cerebral/splenic abscesses, purulent purpura
Immunologic phenomena: glomerulonephritis, Osler nodes, Roth spots, positive
rheumatoid factor
Pending culture results, empirical antimicrobial therapy should be withheld
initially from hemodynamically and clinically stable patients with suspected
subacute IE, especially those who have received antibiotics within the preceding
2 weeks.
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) or other nucleic acid–based techniques
identifying C. burnetii, Bartonella spp., or T. whipplei from the blood and indirect
immunofluorescence assays for IgM and IgG antibodies to Bartonella henselae
or B. quintana with IgG titer /1:800.
Next-generation (shotgun metagenomic) sequenc- ing of pathogen DNA from
serum has emerged as a novel nonculture technology capable of identifying a
wide array of organisms in blood culture–negative IE.
However, Duke-ISCVID Criteria recommend results from such testing that yield
organisms other than C. burnetii, Bartonella spp., or T. whipplei be considered
minor criteria at this time.
egetations recovered at surgery or by embolectomy, pathogens can be
identified by culture and histopathologic examination with spe- cial stains.
A sample of the vegetation should be collected using sterile technique and
saved for molecular testing using PCR with organism- specific primers (e.g., C.
burnetii, Bartonella, T. whipplei, C. acnes, Mycoplasma hominis) or broad-range
PCR targeting 16S ribosomal RNA (or 28S rRNA, if fungi are suspected) followed
by sequencing for organism identification.
Molecular testing is a useful diagnostic tech- nology when the histopathology of
a vegetation is consistent with IE;
molecular testing is only moderately sensi- tive, and thus, a negative test cannot
exclude IE.
When tissue is limited, molecular testing should be prioritized over culture.
Echocardiography anatomically confirms and measures vegetations, detects
intracardiac complications, and assesses cardiac function.
Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) is exception- ally specific; however, in
20% of patients, the images are inadequate. TTE fails to detect vegetations in
20–35% of patients with definite clinical IE, missing vegetations <2 mm in
diameter.
It is not optimal for evaluating prosthetic valves, especially TAVR with large
stents, or detecting intracardiac complications.
TEE detects vegetations in >90% of patients with definite IE;
nevertheless, initial studies may yield false- negative results in 6–18% of IE
patients, especially in TAVR-PVE.
A negative TEE, when IE is likely, does not exclude the diagnosis but rather
warrants repeating the study in 7–10 days.
Electrocardiographic-gated multislice cardiac CT angiogram (CTA), which is less
sensitive than TEE in detection of vegetations, valvular perforation, and
paravalvular leakage but superior in defining pseudoaneurysm or abscess, may
be definitive.
Further, it can be used in lieu of preoperative cardiac catheterization to assess
coronary artery patency in patients at low to intermediate risk of coronary
disease
18F-Fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomog- raphy (FDG-PET)/CT is less
sensitive than TEE or CTA in detecting intracardiac pathology in NVE or CIED-IE
but provides increased sensitivity in assessing suspected PVE, including TAVR-
PVE, infection of ascending aorta grafts, extracardiac complications, left
ventricular assist device (LVAD) infection, and CIED pocket and lead infection.
FDG-PET/CT
can have false-positive results in patients with recent valve surgery (<3
months), and requires experienced radiogra- phers for interpretation.
Of note, findings indicative of IE on CTA and
Page 6
FDG-PET/CT are major criteria and considered equivalent to echocar- diography
in the Duke-ISCVID schema.
IE occurs frequently among patients who have mono- microbial bacteremia due
to those gram-positive organisms that are commonly associated with IE.
12–17% of patients with blood cultures growing E. faecalis have IE; 7% of
patients with blood cultures growing non-0-hemolytic streptococci have IE; and
8–14% of patients with blood cultures growing S. aureus have IE.
Because S. aureus bacteremia is associated with a high prevalence of IE and a
resultant high risk for mortality, echocardiographic evaluation (high-quality TTE
or preferably TEE) is recommended routinely.
when present, these findings are a strong indication for early TEE.
In their absence, TTE should suffice unless other findings suggest IE.
Among patients with either monomicrobial E. faecalis or non-0-hemolytic
streptococcal bacteremia, any three of the respective listed features (Table 133-
4) are associated with a significant frequency of IE.
Patients with recalcitrant back pain or focal spine tenderness should undergo
spine MRI targeted to the appropri- ate level based on symptoms to assess for
osteomyelitis and epidural abscess.
To cure IE, all bacteria in the vegetation must be killed.
This is difficult because local host defenses are deficient and because the
bacteria are largely nongrowing and metabolically inactive and thus are less
easily killed by antibiotics.
Antibiotics are generally given parenterally to achieve serum concentrations
that, through passive diffusion, result in effective concentrations in the depths
of the vegetation.
The regimens recommended for the treatment of PVE (except that caused by
staphylococci), although given for several weeks longer, are similar to those
used to treat NVE
Rec- ommended antibiotic dosing and duration of therapy, which is measured
from the time blood cultures become negative, should be followed unless
alterations are required by end-organ dysfunction or adverse events.
The recom- mended therapies for streptococcal IE are based on the minimal
inhibitory concentration (MIC) of penicillin for the causative isolate
The 2-week penicillin/gentamicin and ceftri- axone/gentamicin regimens should
not be used to treat NVE com- plicated by cardiac or extracardiac abscess or
PVE.
Caution should be exercised in considering aminoglycoside-containing regimens
in patients at increased risk for aminoglycoside toxicity (renal or eighth cranial
nerve)
The regimens recommended for relatively penicillin-resistant streptococci are
advocated for treatment of group B, C, or G streptococcal IE. Granulicatella,
Abiotrophia, and Gemella species are treated with the regimens for moderately
peni- cillin-resistant streptococci, as is PVE caused by these organisms or by
streptococci with a penicillin MIC of >0.1 1g/mL
Enterococci are resistant to oxacillin, nafcillin, and the cephalosporins and are
only inhibited—not killed—by the cell wall–active agents penicillin, ampicillin,
teicoplanin (not avail- able in the United States),
vancomycin, with ampicillin and penicillin being preferred when susceptible
Enterococci are killed by the synergistic interaction of these cell wall–active
antibiotics combined with gentamicin, unless the isolate exhibits high-level
resistance to gentamicin, defined as growth of the isolate in the presence of
gentamicin at /500 1g/mL.
Bactericidal synergy with other aminoglycosides—tobramycin, netilmicin,
kanamycin, and amikacin—is unpredictable even in the absence of high-level
resis- tance; thus, they are not used to treat enterococcal IE.
Although the dose of gentamicin used to achieve bactericidal synergy in treating
enterococcal IE is smaller than that used in stan- dard therapy, nephrotoxicity is
not uncommon during treatment
lasting 4–6 weeks.
Page 7
high-dose regimens using ampicillin-ceftriaxone appear comparable and less
nephrotoxic than penicillin or ampicillin plus gentamicin for treat- ment of E.
faecalis (but not E. faecium) IE and may also provide effective treatment when
strains possess high-level gentamicin resistance.
f a combination regimen cannot be used due to resistance or toxicity, an 8- to
12-week course of a single cell wall–active agent can be considered, although
the patient should be followed carefully for evidence of failure.
Treatment of IE caused by E. faecium, which is generally more antibiotic
resistant than E. faecalis and may be vancomycin resis- tant, is not well
established.
Successful treatment of IE caused by vancomycin-resistant enterococci with
high-dose daptomycin (10–12 mg/kg IV once daily), often in combination with
ampicillin or other 0-lactams, has been reported.
Treatment of staphylococcal IE (Table 133-5) is based on the presence of a
prosthetic valve or foreign device, the native valve(s) involved (right vs left side),
and the antibiotic susceptibility of the isolate.
empirical therapy for possible staphylococcal IE should use a regimen effective
against methicillin-resistant organisms.
Cefazolin is generally considered an alternative 0-lactam agent for the
treatment of methicillin-susceptible S. aureus (MSSA) IE.
Guidelines do not recommend the routine addition of gentamicin, fusidic acid,
rifampin, or daptomy- cin to regimens for MSSA NVE.
For treatment of NVE due to methicillin-resistant S. aureus (MRSA), vancomycin,
dosed to achieve trough concentrations of 15 1g/mL (or an area under the time-
concentration curve/broth microdilution MIC ratio [AUC:MIC] >400 achieved
with the assis- tance of a pharmacist),
Isolates with a vancomycin MIC of 4–8 1g/mL have intermediate susceptibility
and are referred to as
vancomycin-intermediate S. aureus (VISA).
Page 8
Page 9
Isolates with a vanco- mycin MIC of 2 1g/mL may harbor subpopulations with
higher MICs. These isolates, called heteroresistant VISA (hVISA), are not
detectable by routine susceptibility testing and yet may impair van- comycin
effectiveness.
Daptomycin has provided effective alternative treatment for left-sided NVE
caused by documented daptomycin-susceptible MRSA and is associated with
less nephrotoxicity than vancomycin (although it is associated with myositis and,
rarely, eosinophilic pneumonitis).
Case series suggest that high-dose daptomycin combined with nafcillin or
ceftaroline, ceftaroline combined with trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole, or cef-
taroline alone (600 mg IV q8h) may be effective salvage treatment for
vancomycin-unresponsive MRSA IE and should be considered in patients with
sepsis, in those with multifocal sites of infection, or when bacteremia persists
for 4 or more days.
MSSA IE that is uncomplicated and limited to the tricuspid or pulmonic valve can
often be treated with 2 weeks of oxacillin or nafcillin (but not vancomycin).
Prolonged fever (/5 days) during therapy or multiple septic pulmonary emboli
mandate standard- duration therapy
Right-sided MRSA IE is treated for at least 4 weeks with vancomycin or
daptomycin (6 mg/kg daily);
Left-sided staphylococcal IE is treated with a minimum of 6 weeks of therapy.
Staphylococcal PVE is treated with a multidrug regimen for 6–8 weeks
To achieve long-term bacterial eradica- tion, rifampin, which kills staphylococci
embedded in biofilm adherent to foreign material, is considered an essential
component of this regimen.
prevent emergence of resistance, administration of rifampin should be delayed
until initial therapy with two agents (gentamicin plus an
antistaphylococcal penicillin or vancomycin selected on the basis of
susceptibility testing) has eradicated bacteremia (reduced the inoc- ulum).
In the absence of meningitis, IE caused by Streptococcus pneumoniae isolates
with a penicillin MIC of 24 1g/ mL can be treated with IV penicillin (4 million units
IV every 4 h), ceftriaxone (2 g once daily), or vancomycin.
Ceftriaxone or vanco- mycin is preferred for pneumococcal strains with a
penicillin MIC of /2 1g/mL.
If meningitis is suspected, treatment with vancomycin plus ceftriaxone—at the
doses advised for meningitis—should be initiated until susceptibility results are
known.
Definitive therapy should then be selected on the basis of meningitis
breakpoints (penicillin MIC, 0.06 1g/mL; ceftriaxone MIC, 0.5 1g/mL).
Pneu- mococcal NVE is treated for 4 weeks and pneumococcal PVE for 6 weeks.
P. aeruginosa IE is treated with an antipseudomonal cephalosporin and
traditionally high doses of tobramycin,
and IE caused by Enterobacterales is treated with a 0-lactam antibiotic, also
traditionally, plus an aminoglycoside, although data substantiating a need for
combination therapy for these organisms are limited.
Candida IE consists of a lipid formulation of ampho- tericin B (5 mg/kg IV daily)
with or without flucytosine (25 mg/kg PO q6h) (if using flucytosine, monitor
renal function, flucytosine levels, and bone marrow function).
If there is valve dysfunction or PVE, early surgery is advised, as is long-term (if
not indefinite) oral azole suppression.
Absent valve dysfunction, medical treatment with long-term oral azole
suppression may achieve results comparable to surgical treatment.
empirical therapy for acute IE should cover MRSA and in a PWID or for health
care–associated NVE potentially antibiotic-resistant
Page 10
gram-negative bacilli.
Treatment with vancomycin plus gentamicin or cefepime, initiated immediately
after blood cultures are obtained, covers these organisms as well as many
others.
For empirical treat- ment of NVE with a subacute presentation, vancomycin plus
ceftri- axone is reasonable.
For blood culture–pending PVE, vancomycin, gentamicin, and cefepime should
be used if the prosthetic valve has been in place for 21 year.
Empirical therapy for late PVE (valve in place for >1 year) is similar to that for
culture-negative NVE. Therapy is revised once a pathogen has been identified.
blood culture–negative episodes,
marantic endocarditis and the antiphospholipid antibody syndrome must be
considered.
In the absence of prior antibiotic therapy, it is unlikely that infection due to S.
aureus, CoNS, enterococci, or Enterobacterales will present with negative blood
cultures;
thus, recommended empirical therapy targets fastidious streptococci,
Abiotrophia, Gemella, Granulicatella, the HACEK group, and Bar- tonella species.
blood culture–negative subacute NVE is treated with vancomycin plus
ampicillin-sulbactam (12 g every 24 h)
or ceftriaxone;
doxycycline (100 mg twice daily) is added for enhanced Bartonella coverage.
treat
medi- cally with classic PVE antibiotic regimens for the given pathogen.
Antimicrobial therapy for CIED-IE (as well as for gen- erator pocket and lead
infection) is adjunctive to complete removal of the device.
The antimicrobial selected is based on the causative organism and should be
used as recommended for NVE
A 4- to 6-week course of IE-targeted therapy is recommended for patients with
CIED-IE and for those with bacteremia that continues after device removal.
Generator pocket infection without bacteremia is treated with a 10- to 14-day
course, some of which can be given orally.
In the absence of another source, S. aureus bacteremia (and persistent CoNS
bacteremia) is likely indicative of CIED-IE or valvular IE and should be
investigated and managed accordingly.
Attempted salvage of an infected CIED with antibiotics alone and long-term
suppressive therapy is usually unsuccessful and should be reserved for patients
whose devices cannot be removed or who decline removal. Careful follow-up is
required.
Dalbavancin, a lipoglycopeptide with a long half-life allowing for infrequent dos-
ing, is FDA approved for treatment of skin and soft tissue infections.
Fully compliant, clinically stable patients who are no longer bacteremic, are not
febrile, and have no clinical or echocardiographic findings that suggest an
impending complication may complete IV therapy as outpatients.
Antibiotic-related adverse events occur in 25–40% of IE patients and commonly
arise after several weeks of therapy.
Blood tests to detect renal, hepatic, and hematologic toxicity should be
performed periodically.
Serum concentrations of aminoglycosides and vancomycin should be monitored
and doses adjusted to optimize treatment and minimize toxicity.
Blood cultures should be repeated daily until sterile in patients with IE due to S.
aureus or difficult-to- treat organisms and rechecked if there is recrudescent
fever.
Blood cultures become sterile after 2 days of appropriate therapy when infection
is caused by viridans streptococci, E. faecalis, or HACEK organisms.
In MSSA IE, 0-lactam therapy results in sterile cultures in 3–5 days,
whereas in MRSA IE, the duration of bacteremia is often longer with vancomycin
or daptomycin treatment.
MRSA bacteremia persisting despite an appropriate dosage of vancomycin or
daptomycin may indicate emergence of reduced susceptibility in the infecting
strain and point to a need for alternative therapy
When fever persists for 7 days despite appropriate antibiotic ther- apy, patients
should be evaluated further for paravalvular abscess, extracardiac abscesses
(spleen, kidney), or complications (embolic events).
Recrudescent fever raises the possibility of these complica- tions but also of
drug reactions or complications of hospitaliza- tion.
It is advisable to obtain follow-up echocardiography after the completion of
therapy to assess valvular function.
Of note, veg- etations become smaller with effective therapy; however, 3
months after cure, 50% are unchanged, and 25% each are slightly larger or
smaller.
Because patients with IE are at risk for hemorrhagic transformation of embolic
strokes and for intracere- bral hemorrhage from septic arteritis or ruptured
mycotic aneu- rysms, initiation of antithrombotic (anticoagulant or antiplatelet)
therapy requires careful consideration of the risks and benefits.
Antithrombotic therapy can render such bleeding catastrophic.
Neither anticoagulant nor antiplatelet therapy reduces the risk of emboli in
patients with NVE, and thus, such treatment is not
Page 11
in the absence of a contraindication (i.e., no clinical or imaging evidence of a
recent large embolic stroke, intracerebral hemor- rhage, or mycotic aneurysm),
anticoagulant therapy is given to patients who have a mechanical prosthetic
valve, atrial fibrilla- tion with either mitral stenosis or a CHA2DS2-VASc score /2,
or deep-vein thrombophlebitis.
Most experts use unfractionated or low-molecular-weight heparin for ease of
reversal.
therapy should be reversed, at least temporarily, in most patients who have had
an acute ischemic stroke or an intracerebral hemorrhage.
Between 25% and 40% of patients with left-sided IE undergo cardiac surgery
during active infection, with slightly higher surgery rates for PVE than NVE.
The effect of surgery for PVE is more nuanced, with survival ben- efits accruing
largely to those with intracardiac complications
Among patients with TAVR-PVE, 50–80% are reported to have an indication for
surgical intervention—yet because of high pre-TAVR estimated operative
mortality, <15% undergo surgery.
Moderate to severe refractory CHF caused by new or worsening valve
dysfunction or intracardiac fistulae is the major indication for cardiac surgery.
urgery can relieve functional stenosis due to large vegetations or restore
competence to damaged regurgitant valves by repair or replacement.
Page 12
The survival ben- efit with surgery is inversely related to the severity of
preoperative CHF; thus, surgery should not be delayed in the face of deteriorat-
ing hemodynamics.
This complication, which is most com- mon with aortic valve infection, occurs in
10–15% of patients with NVE and in 45–60% of those with PVE.
It is suggested clinically by persistent unexplained fever during appropriate
therapy, new electrocardiographic conduction disturbances, or pericarditis.
TEE with color Doppler is the test of choice to detect paravalvular abscesses
(sensitivity, /85%).
For optimal outcome, paravalvular infection requires surgery, especially when
fever persists, fistulae develop, prostheses are dehisced and unstable, or
infection relapses after appropriate treatment.
Cardiac rhythm must be monitored since high-grade heart block may require
insertion of a pacemaker.
Surgical treatment is also advised for IE caused by organisms against which
effective antimicrobial therapy is lacking (e.g., yeasts, molds, P. aeruginosa,
other highly antibiotic-resistant bacteria, Brucella species).
The mortality rate for S. aureus PVE exceeds 50% with medical treatment and
may be reduced with surgical treat- ment.
Nevertheless, surgery is not routinely advised for uncom- plicated S. aureus PVE
survival benefits are most likely in those with paravalvular infection,
dysfunctional valves, and CHF.
Isolated tricuspid-valve S. aureus IE, even with persistent fever, rarely requires
surgery.
Persisting morbidity and/or death may result from cerebral or coronary artery
emboli. Anti- thrombotic therapy does not prevent systemic emboli in NVE.
Thus, if emboli are to be prevented through surgical intervention, surgery must
occur very early.
Vegetation characteris- tics defined echocardiographically can identify patients
at high risk of embolization but do not identify those patients in whom surgery to
prevent emboli will increase survival
In a small randomized trial in patients who were at low risk of surgery-related
mortality and had large vegetations (>10 mm) and significant valve dysfunction,
emboli were prevented by early surgery (248 h after diagnosis), but there was
no survival benefit.
Removal of all hardware is recommended for patients with established CIED-IE
as well as for pocket or intracardiac lead infection.
Percutaneous lead extraction is preferred; if hard- ware remains after attempted
percutaneous extraction, surgical removal should be considered.
With lead vegetations >2 cm, there is a risk of a pulmonary embolism;
he CIED, if needed, can be reimplanted at a new site after at least 10–14 days of
effective antimicrobial therapy. CIEDs should be replaced when patients
undergo surgery for IE.
With life-threatening indications for surgery (valve dysfunction and severe CHF,
perivalvular abscess, major prosthesis dehiscence), surgery during the initial
days of
therapy is associated with greater survival than later surgery
Recrudescent IE on a newly implanted prosthetic valve follows surgery for active
NVE and PVE in 2% and 6–15% of patients, respectively.
Nonurgent cardiac surgery should be delayed for 2–3 weeks after a large
nonhemorrhagic embolic infarc- tion and for 4 weeks after a significant cerebral
hemorrhage.
A rup- tured mycotic aneurysm should be treated before cardiac surgery.
Organisms have been detected on Gram stain—or their DNA has been detected
by PCR— in excised valves from 45% of patients who have completed the
recommended therapy for IE.
Detection of organisms or their DNA does not necessarily indicate antibiotic
failure; in fact, relapse after surgery for active IE is uncommon.
Thus, in uncomplicated NVE caused by susceptible organisms, the duration of
preoperative plus postoperative treat- ment should equal the total duration of
recommended therapy.
or IE complicated by perivalvular abscess, partially treated PVE, or valves
culture-positive for the original organism, a full course of therapy should be
given postoperatively.
Addressing OUD significantly increases completion of antibiotic therapy,
decreases resumption of injection drug use, and decreases recurrent IE and
requirement for cardiac surgery.
plenic abscess develops in 3–5% of patients with IE.
Effective therapy requires either image-guided percutaneous drainage or
splenectomy.
Mycotic aneurysms occur in 2–15% of IE patients; one-half of these cases
involve the cere- bral arteries and present as headaches, focal neurologic symp-
toms, or hemorrhage.
erebral aneurysms should be monitored by angiography.
Extracerebral aneurysms present as local pain, a mass, local ischemia, or
bleeding; these are treated surgically.
Adverse outcomes are associated with older age, severe comorbid conditions
and diabetes, delayed diagnosis, involve- ment of prosthetic valves or the aortic
valve, an invasive (S. aureus) or antibiotic-resistant (P. aeruginosa, yeast)
pathogen, intracardiac and major neurologic complications, and health care–
associated infection.
Page 13
Death or poor outcome often is related not to failure of antibiotic therapy but
rather to the interactions of comorbidities and IE-related end-organ
complications.
n developed countries, overall survival rates are 80–85%; however, rates vary
considerably among subpopula- tions of IE patients.
About 85–90% of patients with NVE caused by viridans streptococci, HACEK
organisms, or enterococci (susceptible to synergistic therapy) survive.
For S. aureus NVE in patients who do not inject drugs, survival rates are 55–
70%;
rates are 85–90% among PWID.
PVE beginning within 2 months after valve replacement results in mortality rates
of 40–50%, whereas rates are only 10–20% in late-onset cases.
In the elderly population with TAVR-PVE the in-hospital mortality is 35–50% and
increases to 60–75% at 1 year.
Crude survival rates after successful treatment of IE generally are 80–90% and
70–80% at 1 and 2 years, respectively.
