 Infective endocarditis 
 
Vegetation contains all except  
A. Platelets  
B. Fibrin 
C. Microorganisms  
D. Plenty of inflammatory cells  
Answer. D (Harrison 21st edition 1022) 
The prototypic lesion of infective endocarditis, the vegetation, is a mass of platelets, fibrin, microorganisms, and 
scant inflammatory cells. Infection most commonly involves heart valves but may also occur on the low-pressure 
side of a ventricular septal defect, on mural endocardium damaged by aberrant jets of blood or foreign bodies, or 
on intracardiac devices themselves. The analogous process involving arteriovenous shunts, arterio-arterial shunts 
(patent ductus arteriosus), or a coarctation of the aorta is called infective endarteritis. 
 
 
All are true except  
A. Risk of prosthetic valve endocarditis is greatest during 6-12 months after valve replacement  
B. The incidence of infection involving transcatheter implanted aortic valves (TAVR PVE) per 100 patient-
years (PY) is 1.4–2.8 in the first year and 0.8 in each of the ensuing 4 years  
C. Endocarditis involving cardiovascular implantable electronic devices occurs in 0.5 - 1.14 cases per 
1000 device recipients  
D. The risk of PVE is similar for bioprosthetic valve and mechanical valve 
Answer. D (Harrison 21st edition 1023) 
While congenital heart diseases remain a constant predisposition, predisposing conditions in developed countries 
have shifted from chronic rheumatic heart disease (still a common predisposition in developing countries) to illicit 
IV drug use, degenerative valve disease, and intracardiac devices. The incidence of endocarditis is notably 
increased among the elderly. In developed countries, 25–35% of cases of native-valve endocarditis (NVE) are 
associated with health care, and 16–30% of all cases are prosthetic-valve infections (PVE). The risk of PVE is 
greatest during the initial year after valve replacement; gradually declines to a low, stable rate thereafter; and is 
greater for bioprosthetic valves than mechanical valves. The incidence of infection involving transcatheter 
implanted aortic valves (TAVR PVE) per 100 patient-years (PY) is 1.4–2.8 in the first year and 0.8 in each of the 
ensuing 4 years. The incidence of TAVR-PVE is similar to that for surgically implanted bioprosthetic aortic valves. IE 

involving cardiovascular implantable electronic devices (CIED-IE)—greater on implanted defibrillators and 
resynchronization devices than on permanent pacemakers—occurs in 0.5–1.14 cases per 1000 recipients 
 
 
 
Health care associated native valve endocarditis most commonly caused by 
A. Streptococcus  
B. Staphylococcus aureus  
C. Enterococcus  
D. Coagulase negative staphylococcus  
Answer. B (Harrison 21st edition 1023) 
Health care–associated NVE, most commonly caused by Staphylococcus aureus, coagulase-negative staphylococci 
(CoNS), and enterococci, may have either a nosocomial onset (55%) or a community onset (45%) in patients who 
have had extensive contact with the health care system. Endocarditis complicates 8–25% of episodes of catheter-
associated S. aureus bacteremia; the higher rates are detected in high-risk patients studied by transesophageal 
echocardiography (TEE) 
 
 

 
Late prosthetic valve endocarditis is 
A. After 2 months  
B. After 6 months  
C. After 12 months 
D. After 24 months  
Answer. C (Harrison 21st edition 1023) 
PVE arising within 2 months of valve surgery—i.e., early PVE—is generally nosocomial and is the result of 
intraoperative contamination of the prosthesis or a bacteremic postoperative complication. This nosocomial origin 
is reflected in the primary microbial causes: S. aureus, CoNS, facultative gram-negative bacilli, diphtheroids, and 
fungi. The portals of entry and organisms causing cases beginning >12 months after surgery—i.e., late PVE—are 
similar to those in community-acquired NVE. PVE due to CoNS that presents 2–12 months after surgery often 
represents delayed-onset nosocomial infection. Regardless of the time of onset after surgery, at least 68–85% of 
CoNS strains that cause PVE are resistant to methicillin. 
 
 
All are true about CIED except  
A. One third present within 3 months  
B. One third present 4-12 months  
C. One third present after 12 months  
D. Commonly caused by staphylococcus aureus which is methicillin sensitive  
Answer. D (Harrison 21st edition 1023) 
CIED endocarditis involves the device or the endothelium at points of device contact. Occasionally, there is 
concurrent aortic or mitral valve infection. One-third of cases of CIED endocarditis present within 3 months after 
device implantation or manipulation, one-third present at 4–12 months, and one-third present at >1 year. S. 
aureus and CoNS, cause the majority of cases. 
 
 
An indolent culture negative afebrile form of endocarditis caused by  
A. Tropheryma whipplei  

B. Bartonella  
C. Streptococcus  
D. Pneumococcal  
Answer. A (Harrison 21st edition 1024) 
From 5 to 15% of patients with endocarditis have negative blood cultures; in one-third to one-half of these cases, 
cultures are negative because of prior antibiotic exposure. The remainder of these patients are infected by 
fastidious organisms, such as some streptococci (nutritionally variant bacteria now designated Granulicatella and 
Abiotrophia species), HACEK organisms, Coxiella burnetii, and Bartonella species. Some fastidious organisms occur 
in characteristic geographic settings (e.g., C. burnetii and Bartonella species in Europe, Brucella species in the 
Middle East). Tropheryma whipplei causes an indolent, culture-negative, afebrile form of endocarditis. C. burnetii 
has a predilection for prosthetic valves. Corynebacterium species and Propionibacterium acnes may involve 
intracardiac devices and be slow to grow in blood cultures. Lastly, atrial myxoma, marantic endocarditis, and the 
antiphospholipid antibody syndrome may mimic culture-negative infectious endocarditis 
 
 
All are true except  
A. Non bacterial thrombotic endocarditis- Thrombus on the low pressure side of cardiac structural lesion 
B. Marantic endocarditis- uninfected vegetations seen in patients with malignancy and chronic diseases  
C. Janeway lesions- vascular phenomenon in endocarditis  
D. Spondylodiscitis- back pain in endocarditis  
Answer. D (Harrison 21st edition 1024/1025) 
The undamaged endothelium is resistant to infection by most bacteria and to thrombus formation. Endothelial 
injury (e.g., at the site of impact of high-velocity blood jets or on the low-pressure side of a cardiac structural 
lesion) allows either direct infection by virulent organisms or the development of a platelet–fibrin thrombus—a 
condition called nonbacterial thrombotic endocarditis (NBTE). This thrombus serves as a site of bacterial 
attachment during transient bacteremia. The cardiac conditions most commonly resulting in NBTE are mitral regur-
gitation, aortic stenosis, aortic regurgitation, ventricular septal defects, and complex congenital heart disease. 
NBTE also arises as a result of a hypercoagulable state; this phenomenon gives rise to marantic endocarditis 
(uninfected vegetations seen in patients with malignancy and chronic diseases) and to bland vegetations 
complicating systemic lupus erythematosus and antiphospholipid antibody syndrome. 
The classic nonsuppurative peripheral manifestations of subacute endocarditis (e.g., Janeway lesions) are related 
to prolonged infection; with early diagnosis and treatment, these have become infrequent. In contrast, septic 
embolization mimicking some of these lesions (subungual hemorrhage, Osler’s nodes) is common in patients with 
acute S. aureus endocarditis. Musculoskeletal pain usually remits promptly with treatment but must be 
distinguished from focal metastatic infections (e.g., spondylodiscitis), which may complicate 10–15% of cases. 

 
 
All are true about endocarditis except  
A. CHF ultimately develops in 85% of patients  
B. Heart failure due to mitral valve dysfunction progress fast than aortic valve dysfunction  
C. Mitral peri valvular abscess rarely causes conduction disturbance  
D. Emboli to coronary artery occurs in 2% of patients  
Answer. B (Harrison 21st edition 1024/1025) 
In acute endocarditis involving a normal valve, murmurs may be absent initially but ultimately are detected in 85% 
of cases. Congestive heart failure (CHF) develops in 30–40% of patients as a consequence of valve dysfunction or, 
occasionally, intracardiac fistulae. Heart failure due to aortic valve dysfunction progresses more rapidly than does 
that due to mitral valve dysfunction. Extension of infection beyond valve leaflets into adjacent annular or 
myocardial tissue results in perivalvular abscesses, which in turn may cause intracardiac fistulae with new 
murmurs. Abscesses may burrow from the aortic valve annulus into the upper ventricular septum, where they may 
interrupt the conduction system, leading to varying degrees of heart block. Mitral perivalvular abscesses, which are 
usually more distant from the conduction system, only rarely cause conduction abnormalities. Emboli to a 
coronary artery occur in 2% of patients and may result in myocardial infarction. 
 
Least seen in infective endocarditis  
A. Fever 
B. Rheumatoid factor 
C. Oslers nodes 
D. Splenomegaly  
Answer. C (Harrison 21st edition 1024) 
Clinical and Laboratory Features of Infective Endocarditis  
FEATURE  
FREQUENCY, %  
Fever  
80–90  
Chills and sweats  
40–75  
Anorexia, weight loss, malaise  
25–50  

Myalgias, arthralgias  
15–30  
Back pain  
7–15  
Heart murmur  
80–85  
New/worsened regurgitant murmur  
20–50  
Arterial emboli  
20–50  
Splenomegaly  
15–50  
Clubbing  
10–20  
Neurologic manifestations  
20–40  
Peripheral manifestations (Osler’s nodes, subungual hemorrhages, 
Janeway lesions, Roth’s spots)  
2–15  
Petechiae  
10–40  
Laboratory manifestations  
Anemia  
70–90  
Leukocytosis  
20–30  
Microscopic hematuria  
30–50  
Elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate  
60–90  
Elevated C-reactive protein level  
>90  
Rheumatoid factor  
50  
Circulating immune complexes  
65–100  
Decreased serum complement  
5–40  
 
 
 
Independent association with increased risk of embolization in endocarditis is seen in all except  
A. Staphylococcus aureus infection 
B. Vegetation more than 10 mm in diameter and mobile  
C. Infection of anterior leaflet of mitral valve 

D. Prosthetic valve endocarditis  
Answer. D (Harrison 21st edition 1025) 
Arterial emboli, one-half of which precede the diagnosis of endocarditis, are clinically apparent in up to 
50% of patients. Endocarditis caused by S. aureus, mobile vegetations >10 mm in diameter, and 
infection involving the mitral valve, especially the anterior leaflet, are independently associated with an 
increased risk of embolization. Embolic arterial occlusion causes regional pain or ischemia-induced organ 
dysfunction (e.g., of the kidney, spleen, bowel, extremity). Cerebrovascular emboli presenting as strokes 
or occasionally as encephalopathy complicate 15–35% of cases of endocarditis; however, evidence of 
clinically asymptomatic emboli is found on MRI in 30–65% of patients with left-sided endocarditis. The 
frequency of stroke is 8 per 1000 patient-days during the week prior to diagnosis; the subsequent fall in 
frequency—to 4.8 and 1.7 per 1000 patient-days during the first and second weeks of effective anti-
microbial therapy, respectively—is unrelated to change in vegetation size. Only 3% of strokes occur after 
1 week of effective therapy. Emboli occurring late during or after effective therapy do not in themselves 
constitute evidence of failed antimicrobial treatment. 
 
 
All are complications of endocarditis except  
A. Mycotic aneurysms  
B. Hypocomplementemic glomerulonephritis  
C. Prosthetic valve partial dehiscence  
D. SSPE 
Answer. D (Harrison 21st edition 1025) 
Neurologic complications include aseptic or purulent meningitis, intracranial hemorrhage due to hemorrhagic 
infarcts or ruptured mycotic aneurysms, and seizures. (Mycotic aneurysms are focal dilations of arteries occurring 
at points in the artery wall that have been weakened by infection in the vasa vasorum or where septic emboli have 
lodged.) Microabscesses in brain and meninges occur commonly in S. aureus endocarditis; surgically drainable 
intracerebral abscesses are infrequent.  
Immune complex deposition on the glomerular basement membrane causes diffuse hypoco mplementemic 
glomerulonephritis and renal dysfunction, which typically improve with effective antimicrobial therapy. Embolic 
renal infarcts cause flank pain and hematuria but rarely cause renal dysfunction. 
 
 
All are minor criteria for infective endocarditis except  

A. Predisposing heart condition  
B. New valvular regurgitation  
C. Glomerulonephritis 
D. Intracranial haemorrhage  
Answer. B (Harrison 21st edition 1026) 
The Modified Duke Criteria for the Clinical Diagnosis of Infective Endocarditis  a  
Major Criteria  
1. Positive blood culture  
Typical microorganism for infective endocarditis from two separate blood cultures  
Viridans streptococci, Streptococcus gallolyticus, HACEK group organisms, Staphylococcus aureus, or  
Community-acquired enterococci in the absence of a primary focus,  
or  
Persistently positive blood culture, defined as recovery of a microorganism consistent with infective 
endocarditis from:  
Blood cultures drawn >12 h apart; or  
All of 3 or a majority of ≥4 separate blood cultures, with first and last drawn at least 1 h apart  
or  
Single positive blood culture for Coxiella burnetii or phase I IgG antibody titer of >1:800  
2. Evidence of endocardial involvement  
Positive echocardiogram  b  
Oscillating intracardiac mass on valve or supporting structures or in the path of regurgitant jets or in 
implanted material, in the absence of an alternative anatomic explanation, or  
Abscess, or  
New partial dehiscence of prosthetic valve,  
or  
New valvular regurgitation (increase or change in preexisting murmur not sufficient)  
Minor Criteria  

1. Predisposition: predisposing heart conditions  c or injection drug use  
2. Fever ≥38.0°C (≥100.4°F)  
3. Vascular phenomena: major arterial emboli, septic pulmonary infarcts, mycotic aneurysm, intracranial 
hemorrhage, conjunctival hemorrhages, Janeway lesions  
4. Immunologic phenomena: glomerulonephritis, Osler’s nodes, Roth’s spots, rheumatoid factor  
5. Microbiologic evidence: positive blood culture but not meeting major criterion, as noted previously, d or 
serologic evidence of active infection with an organism consistent with infective endocarditis  
a-Definite endocarditis is defined by documentation of two major criteria, of one major criterion and three 
minor criteria, or of five minor criteria. See text for further details. B-Transesophageal echocardiography is 
required for optimal assessment of possible prosthetic valve endocarditis or complicated endocarditis. C-
Valvular disease with stenosis or regurgitation, presence of a prosthetic valve, congenital heart disease 
including corrected or partially corrected conditions (except isolated atrial septal defect, repaired ventricular 
septal defect, or closed patent ductus arteriosus), prior endocarditis, or hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. D-
Excluding single positive cultures for coagulase-negative staphylococci and diphtheroids, which are common 
culture contaminants, or for organisms that do not cause endocarditis frequently, such as gram-negative 
bacilli.  
 
- 
Documentation of two major criteria, of one major criterion and three minor criteria, or of five minor 
criteria allows a clinical diagnosis of definite endocarditis. The diagnosis of endocarditis is rejected if an 
alternative diagnosis is established, if symptoms resolve and do not recur with ≤4 days of antibiotic 
therapy, or if surgery or autopsy after ≤4 days of antimicrobial therapy yields no histologic evidence of 
endocarditis. Illnesses not classified as definite endocarditis or rejected as such are considered cases of 
possible infective endocarditis when either one major and one minor criterion or three minor criteria are 
fulfilled. 
 
 
All are true except 
A. TTE detects vegetations more than 2mm in diameter 
B. TTE detects vegetations in 65–80% of patients with definite clinical endocarditis 
C. TEE is safe and detects vegetations in >90% of patients with definite endocarditis 
D. Negative TEE result excludes diagnosis of infective endocarditis 
Answer. D (Harrison 21st edition 1026) 

Echocardiography anatomically confirms and measures vegetations, detects intracardiac complications, and 
assesses cardiac function. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) is exceptionally specific; however, in 20% of 
patients the images are inadequate. TTE fails to detect vegetations in 20–35% of patients with definite clinical IE, 
missing vegetations <2 mm in diameter. It is not optimal for evaluating prosthetic valves, especially TAVR with 
large stents, or detecting intracardiac complications. TEE detects vegetations in >90% of patients with definite IE; 
nevertheless, initial studies may yield false-negative results in 6–18% of IE patients, especially in TAVR-PVE. A 
negative TEE, when IE is likely, does not exclude the diagnosis but rather warrants repeating the study in 7–10 
days. TEE is sometimes augmented by 3-D TEE for the diagnosis of PVE and CIED-IE and for the detection of 
myocardial abscess, fistulae, or valve perforations 
 
 
All are true about treatment of enteroccal IE except 
A. Enterococci are killed by the cell wall active agents penicillin, ampicillin, teicoplanin, and vancomycin 
B. Enterococci are resistant to oxacillin, nafcillin, and the cephalosporins  
C. Enterococci are killed by the synergistic interaction of these cell wall–active antibiotics combined with 
gentamicin  
D. Bactericidal synergy with tobramycin, netilmicin, kanamycin, and amikacin—is unpredictable even in 
the absence of high-level resistance 
Answer. A (Harrison 21st edition 1028) 
Enterococci are resistant to oxacillin, nafcillin, and the cephalosporins and are only inhibited—not killed—by the 
cell wall–active agents penicillin, ampicillin, teicoplanin (not available in the United States), and vancomycin. 
Enterococci are killed by the synergistic interaction of these cell wall–active antibiotics combined with gentamicin, 
unless the isolate exhibits high-level resistance to gentamicin, defined as growth of the isolate in the presence of 
gentamicin at ≥500 μg/mL. Bactericidal synergy with other aminoglycosides—tobramycin, netilmicin, kanamycin, 
and amikacin—is unpredictable even in the absence of high-level resistance; thus, they are not used to treat 
enterococcal IE. 
 
The regimens used to treat staphylococcal endocarditis are based on all except 
A. Presence or absence of a prosthetic valve or foreign device 
B. Native valve(s) involved (right vs left side) 
C. Susceptibility of the isolate  
D. Coagulase production 
Answer. D (Harrison 21st edition 1028) 

The regimens used to treat staphylococcal endocarditis are based not on coagulase production but rather on the 
presence or absence of a prosthetic valve or foreign device, the native valve(s) involved (right vs left side), and the 
susceptibility of the isolate  
 
 
All are used for NVE by staph.aureus routinely except 
A. Oxacillin 
B. Cefazolin 
C. Vancomycin 
D. Gentamycin 
Answer. D (Harrison 21st edition 1028) 
The addition of gentamicin to a β-lactam antibiotic or vancomycin to enhance therapy for left-sided NVE has not 
improved survival rates and is associated with nephrotoxicity. Most guidelines do not recommend the routine 
addition of gentamicin, fusidic acid, or rifampin to regimens for S. aureus NVE. 
 
Empirical treatment of blood culture negative infective endocarditis  
A. Gentamycin + Vancomycin 
B. Vancomycin + Ceftriaxone 
C. Vancomycin + rifampin 
D. Gentamycin + Ceftriaxone 
Answer B (Harrison 21st edition 1030) 
In the treatment of blood culture–negative episodes, marantic endocarditis and the antiphospholipid antibody 
syndrome must be considered. Fastidious organisms should be investigated by serologic testing. In the absence of 
prior antibiotic therapy, it is unlikely that infection due to S. aureus, CoNS, enterococci, or Enterobacteriaceae will 
present with negative blood cultures; thus, in this situation, recommended empirical therapy targets not these 
organisms but rather fastidious streptococci, nutritionally variant organisms, the HACEK group, and Bartonella 
species. Pending the availability of diagnostic data, blood culture–negative subacute NVE is treated with 
vancomycin plus ampicillin-sulbactam (12 g every 24 h) or ceftriaxone; doxycycline (100 mg twice daily) is added 
for enhanced Bartonella coverage. If cultures are negative because of prior antibiotic administration, pathogens 
that are likely to be inhibited by the specific prior therapy should be considered. 
 

All are true except 
A. A 4- to 6-week course of endocarditis-targeted therapy is recommended for patients with CIED 
endocarditis 
B. A 4- to 6-week course of endocarditis-targeted therapy is recommended for those with bacteremia 
that continues during ongoing antimicrobial therapy after device removal 
C. Generator pocket infection without bacteremia is treated with a 10- to 14-day course, all to be given 
injectable 
D. S. aureus bacteremia (and persistent CoNS bacteremia) in patients with a CIED is likely to be indicative 
of CIED 
Answer. C (Harrison 21st edition 1030/1031) 
Bacteremic CIED infection may be complicated by coincident left-sided NVE, PVE, or remote-site infection (e.g., 
osteomyelitis) and may require modification of antimicrobial therapy. A 4- to 6-week course of endocarditis-
targeted therapy is recommended for patients with CIED endocarditis and for those with bacteremia that 
continues during ongoing antimicrobial therapy after device removal. Generator pocket infection without 
bacteremia is treated with a 10- to 14-day course, some of which can be given orally. In the absence of another 
source, S. aureus bacteremia (and persistent CoNS bacteremia) in patients with a CIED is likely to be indicative of 
CIED or valvular endocarditis and should be managed accordingly. However, not all bloodstream infections in these 
patients indicate endocarditis 
 
All are true about anticoagulant use in infective endocarditis except 
A. Anticoagulants reduce the risk of embolization of vegetation 
B. If no contraindication is there anticoagulation can be given in AF if CHADS2 core is more than 2 
C. LMWH is preferred for anticoagulation 
D. Anticoagulation should be reversed if stroke occurs 
Answer. A (Harrison 21st edition 1031) 
Neither anticoagulant nor antiplatelet therapy reduces the risk of emboli in patients with NVE, and thus 
such treatment is not indicated for that purpose. However, patients with infective endocarditis may 
have coexisting conditions wherein anticoagulation is indicated. Thus, in the absence of a con-
traindication (i.e., no clinical or imaging evidence of a recent large embolic stroke, intracerebral 
hemorrhage, or mycotic aneurysm), anticoagulant therapy is given to patients who have a mechanical 
prosthetic valve, atrial fibrillation with either mitral stenosis or a CHADS2 score ≥2, or deep-vein 
thrombophlebitis. Most experts prefer to use unfractionated or low-molecular-weight heparin for ease 

of reversal. Anticoagulant therapy should be reversed, at least temporarily, in most patients who have 
had an acute ischemic stroke or an intracerebral hemorrhage. 
 
 
 
Surgery to Be Strongly Considered for Improved Outcome in infective endocarditis in all of the following 
except 
A. Very large (>10-mm) vegetation 
B. Persistent unexplained fever (≥10 days) in blood culture–negative endocarditis 
C. Poorly responsive or relapsed endocarditis due to highly antibiotic-resistant enterococci or gram-
negative bacilli 
D. Relapse after optimal antimicrobial therapy in prosthetic-valve endocarditis 
Answer. A (Harrison 21st edition 1031) 
Indications for Cardiac Surgical Treatment in Patients with Endocarditis  
Surgery Required for Optimal Outcome  
Native-valve or prosthetic-valve endocarditis  
Moderate or severe congestive heart failure or shock due to valve dysfunction  
Perivalvular extension of infection with abscess, fistula, or heart block  
Persistent bacteremia without an extracardiac cause despite 7–10 days of optimal antimicrobial therapy  
Lack of effective antimicrobial therapy (e.g., fungal, Brucella, multidrug-resistant gram-negative bacillary 
endocarditis)  
Prosthetic-valve endocarditis  
Partially dehisced unstable prosthetic valve  
Surgery to Be Strongly Considered for Improved Outcome a  
Prosthetic-valve endocarditis  
- 
S. aureus infection with intracardiac complications  
- 
Relapse after optimal antimicrobial therapy  

Native-valve endocarditis  
- 
Large (>10-mm) hypermobile vegetation, particularly with prior systemic embolus and significant 
valve dysfunction b  
- 
Very large (>30-mm) vegetation  
- 
Persistent unexplained fever (≥10 days) in blood culture–negative endocarditis  
- 
Poorly responsive or relapsed endocarditis due to highly antibiotic-resistant enterococci or gram-
negative bacilli  
a-Carefully consider surgery. Multiple findings are often combined to justify surgery. B-In the group with 
an estimated low cardiac-surgery mortality risk.  
 
 
All are used for prophylaxis of Endocarditis except 
A. Amoxicillin 
B. Doxycycline 
C. Clarithromycin 
D. Clindamycin 
Answer. D (Harrison 21st edition 1033) 
Antibiotic Regimens for Prophylaxis of Endocarditis in Adults with High-Risk Cardiac Lesions 
A. Standard oral regimen  
Amoxicillin: 2 g PO 1 h before procedure  
B. Inability to take oral medication  
Ampicillin: 2 g IV or IM within 1 h before procedure  
C. Penicillin allergy  
1. Clarithromycin or azithromycin: 500 mg PO 1 h before procedure  
2. Cephalexinc: 2 g PO 1 h before procedure  
3. Doxycycline: 100 mg PO 1 h before procedure 
D. Penicillin allergy, inability to take oral medication  

Cefazolinc or ceftriaxonec: 1 g IV or IM 30 min before procedure  
 
 
 
Emergency cardiac surgery is advised in infective endocarditis in 
A. Valve obstruction by vegetation 
B. Acute aortic or mitral regurgitation with heart failure 
C. Sinus of Valsalva abscess ruptured into right heart 
D. Fungal (mold) endocarditis 
Answer. C (Harrison 21st edition 1032) 
 
 
 
High-risk cardiac lesions for which endocarditis prophylaxis is advised before dental procedures include 
all except 
A. Prosthetic heart valves 
B. Completely repaired congenital heart defects during the 6 months after repair 
C. Valvulopathy developing after cardiac transplantation 

D. Rheumatic mitral stenosis 
Answer. D (Harrison 21st edition 1034) 
High-Risk Cardiac Lesions for Which Endocarditis Prophylaxis Is Advised Before Dental Procedures  
Prosthetic heart valves  
Prior endocarditis  
Unrepaired cyanotic congenital heart disease, including palliative shunts or conduits  
Completely repaired congenital heart defects during the 6 months after repair  
Incompletely repaired congenital heart disease with residual defects adjacent to prosthetic material  
Valvulopathy developing after cardiac transplantation 
 
 
 
 
 

